Maitreya's Aspiration
In the language of India:ārya-maitrī-praṇidhānarāja
In the language of Tibet:pakpa champé mönlam gyi gyalpo
In the English language:The Noble Maitreya’s King of Aspirations
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Homage to all buddhas!
Homage to the bodhisattvas
Who possess the divine vision of seers,
And homage to the hearers as well.
Homage to bodhicitta, the heart of awakening,
That keeps the lower realms at bay,
That shows us the way to the higher realms,
And leads us to a state beyond ageing and death.
I go before the awakened ones
To confess any and all misdeeds
That I may have committed
While under the sway of mind.
May all merit accrued
Through the three kinds of actions
Become a seed for my omniscience
And inexhaustible awakening.
The buddhas are aware and rejoice in any offering
Made to the awakened ones
Throughout the buddhafields of the ten directions,
And so do I too rejoice.
I hereby confess all negative actions.
I hereby rejoice in everything meritorious.
I hereby pay homage to all buddhas.
May I attain the supreme wisdom state.
I exhort each and every bodhisattva
Dwelling in the ten directions
And upon the ten bodhisattva levels
To awaken now to supreme enlightenment.
And, as they awaken to sublime enlightenment,
May they turn the wheel of Dharma
So as to tame the demons and all their hordes,
And bring benefit to every living being.
May the beat of the great drum of Dharma
Free beings from their suffering.
For unimaginable billions of eons,
May the awakened ones teach Dharma and remain.
I beg you, best of humans,
Look upon us drowning in the mud of desires,
Bound by the ropes of craving,
And in other ways absolutely trapped.
May the buddhas not level criticism
Against those of impure minds.
Instead, may they give love to beings
And free them from the ocean of existence!
May I train in the likeness
Of the perfectly awakened buddhas
Of the present, past, and future,
And uphold the bodhisattva conduct.
May I bring to completion the six perfections
And lead, to the end, the six classes of beings.
May I manifest at last the six super-knowledges
And reach the unsurpassed state of awakening.
May I realize the truth of emptiness
In which all is birthless and non-arising,
Without intrinsic nature, without location,
With neither mental process nor substance.
Just like the great sage, the Buddha himself,
May I realize the truth of selflessness
In which beings do not exist, nor any living things,
Nor an individual, nor any kind of person.
May I practice generosity free from stinginess
Without entertaining any notion of substantiality,
Nor any belief in the self nor egoistical clinging,
So that the benefit may reach all beings.
Since material things do not exist concretely,
May all my needs be spontaneously met.
Since all material things are subject to decay,
May I master the perfection of generosity.
With discipline completely flawless,
Discipline that is perfectly pure,
And discipline devoid of arrogance,
May I master the perfection of discipline.
With absence of anger—in other words, with patience,
Akin to how the earth, water, and fire elements,
And the wind element as well, dwell not anywhere,
May I complete the perfection of patience.
With persistent application of diligence
May I be ever joyful and free from laziness,
And with strength in both body and mind
May I complete the perfection of diligence.
With illusion-like meditative concentration,
And bravery-inspiring meditative concentration,
And vajra-like meditative concentration,
May I master the perfection of meditation.
Acting with the three gates of liberation,
With the equality of the three times,
And the threefold knowledge,
May I master the perfection of wisdom.
May I be praised by all buddhas
As I beam with light and splendour,
And with the diligence of a bodhisattva
May all my aims be accomplished.
As I engage in this very conduct,
May I, the one known as Maitreya,
Bring to completion the six perfections
And reach the ten bodhisattva levels.
At the very moment I pass away,
May I joyfully take rebirth in Tuṣita Heaven
And, swiftly delighting the Lord Maitreya,
Receive his prophecy of my awakening.
