The Excellent Benefits of the Praise
Oṃ. Homage to the noble lady Tārā!
Homage to Tārā, swift and valiant,
Homage to Tuttārā, who banishes fear,
Homage to Turā, who fulfils every need,
Withsvāhāwe offer you honor and praise!1
Homage to Tārā, swift and valiant,
Whose glance flashes like flares of lightning;
Born on the heart of a blossoming lotus
That rose from the tears of the Triple World’s Lord. (1)
Homage to the one whose countenance is
A hundred full moons gathered in autumn,
Smiling and glowing with brilliant radiance,
Like a thousand stars clustered, ablaze. (2)
Homage, golden lady, whose lotus-hand
Is graced with a blue water-born flower.
You embody generosity, diligence, endurance,
Serenity, patience and meditation. (3)
Homage to the one whose victories are endless,
Jewel on the great Tathāgata’s crown.
You are well served by the heirs of the Victors,
Those who’ve accomplished all the perfections. (4)
Homage to the one who, withtuttāraandhūṃ,
Fills desire realms unto the ends of space.
You trample underfoot the seven worlds,
And have the strength to summon all. (5)
Homage to the one, praised by Indra,
Agni, Brahmā, Maruts,2and Śiva.
All the hosts of bhūtas, vetālas,
Gandharvas and yakṣas pay tribute to you. (6)
Homage to the one who, withtraṭandphaṭ,
Crushes the enemies’yantras3to dust.
With right leg bent in and left leg extended,
Shining you tread amidst a turbulent blaze. (7)
Homage to Ture, the fearsome lady,
Destroyer of the most powerful demons.
With a lotus-face and a deep-furrowed brow,
You are the slayer of each and every foe. (8)
Homage to the one whose fingers grace
Her heart and display the Three Jewelsmudrā.
You’re graced by wheels adorning every direction,
With dazzling radiance that overwhelms all.4(9)
Homage to the one, supremely joyous,
Whose splendorous crown spreads garlands of light.
Smiling and laughing, withtuttāre
You bring demons and worlds under control. (10)
Homage to the one who can summon
The hosts of earthly guardians.
Your frown it quivers, and the syllablehūṃ
Delivers us all from every misfortune. (11)
Homage to the one, so brightly adorned,
Who has a sliver of moon for a crown,5
Your locks are graced by Amitābha,
Whose gleaming rays stream forever forth. (12)
Homage to the one in a blazing halo
Of flames, all-consuming, apocalyptic—
Your right leg stretched out and left leg bent inward,
The whirl of enemies blissfully crushing. (13)
Homage to the one who strikes the ground
With her palms and stamps her feet—
Your brow deeply furrowed, withhūṃyou smash
The seven netherworlds to nothing but dust. (14)
Homage to the one, blissful, gracious and tranquil,
Whose domain is the peace of nirvāṇa.
Withoṃandsvāhāin perfect union,
You destroy every terrible evil. (15)
Homage to the one, immersed in rapture,
Who shatters the bodies of all foes.
You manifest from the wisdom-syllablehūṃ,6
And display each of your mantra’s ten syllables. (16)
Homage to Ture, her feet stomping boldly,
Formed from the seed of the syllablehūṃ.
The mountains of Meru, Mandara and Vindhya,
And all the three worlds, you cause them to quake. (17)
Homage to the one, who holds in her hand
A deer-marked moon7like a divine lake.
Withtāratwice and then withphaṭ,
You totally cleanse all of the poisons. (18)
Homage to the one, who is honored by kings
Of hosts divine, gods and kiṃnaras;8
Clad in your armour of joy and splendour,
You clear away nightmares, soothe away strife. (19)
Homage to the one whose eyes shine with lustre,
Bright with the fullness of the sun and moon;
With twice-utteredharaand then withtuttāre
You pacify even the cruelest of diseases. (20)
Homage to the one with the power to free,
Who puts forth the realities as a set of three.
Supreme Ture, you completely destroy
The hordes of grahas,9vetālas,10and yakṣas.11(21)
This Praise with the twenty-one verses of homage
Is itself the root mantra.
The wise who recite these words in earnest,
Filled with genuine devotion for this goddess, (22)
At dusk, and also having risen at dawn,
With recollection, will be granted fearlessness;
They will utterly eliminate all misdeeds,
And surmount all evil destinies. (23)
Seventy million victorious buddhas
Will swiftly confer empowerment upon them,
And they will attain greatness in this world,
And reach the ultimate state of buddhahood. (24)
Even the most powerful and toxic poisons,
Which derive from plants or living beings,
Whether eaten or taken as a draught,
Will be purged entirely by recalling this praise. (25)
Reciting this two or three or seven times12
Will eliminate multitudes of suffering
Brought about by spirits, pestilence, and poison—
And this applies even to other beings as well. (26)
Those who wish for progeny will have them;
Those who wish for riches will acquire them;
Each and every wish will hereby be fulfilled,
And obstacles, entirely vanquished, will be no more. (27)
